this is democracy now democracynow.org
the war and peace report
I'm Amy Goodman as we continue to look
senator Bernie Sanders runaway victory
in Nevada which cemented his position as
the frontrunner for the Democratic
presidential nomination as Sanders bid
for the Democratic nomination looks more
and more likely and the Democratic Party
establishment and much of the mainstream
media are openly expressing concern
about a self-described Democratic
Socialist leading the presidential
ticket his opponents including former
Vice President Joe Biden and former
South Bend mayor Pete Budaj are also on
the attack
senator Sanders believes in an
inflexible ideological revolution that
leaves out most Democrats not to mention
most Americans a socialist Bhutto Kratt
I'm a Democrat was Joe Biden and before
that Pete Buddha judge they were
speaking on Saturday night after the
results from the Nevada caucuses were
ruled in will last wing week during the
primary debate in Las Vegas Bernie
Sanders address misconceptions about
socialism with people correctly pointed
out much higher quality of life in many
respects then we what are we talking
about we are living in many ways in a
socialist society right now problem is
as dr. Martin Luther King reminded us we
have socialism for the very rich rugged
individualism
[Applause]
and subsidize workers so that was Bernie
Sanders for more we host a debate on
Bernie Sanders and democratic socialism
with us in our New York studio is the
Nobel prize-winning economists the op-ed
columnist for The New York Times
Paul Krugman his latest book is just out
it's called arguing with zombies
economics politics and the fight for a
better future one of his recent columns
is headlined Bernie Sanders isn't a
socialist also with us in studio is
Richard Wolff professor emeritus of
economics at the University of
Massachusetts Amherst visiting professor
at the new school here in New York he is
the founder of democracy at work and
hosts a weekly national TV and radio
program called economic update among his
books his latest is called understanding
socialism we welcome you both to
Democracy Now well well what do you make
of what is happening right now Paul
Krugman with Bernie Sanders so far the
clear front-runner but moving into South
Carolina and why that headline Bernie
Sanders is not a socialist what you were
getting at okay
I mean it's Bernie says he loves Denmark
I love Denmark I think Denmark is an
illustration of how decent a society can
be the Danes don't think that they're
socialists they think that their Social
Democrats they don't use the word
socialist and and that isn't socialism
as we've always you know used to
understand it it's not a government
ownership of the means of production
it's not seizing the commanding heights
of the economy it's a really strong
social safety net and a strong labor
movement all of
I support in arguing with zombies I have
a whole chapter called ich socialism
which is about the Republican habit of
playing three-card Monte you say that
you're for universal health care they
say as socialist you say you're for
universal child care they say think
about how many people Stalin killed you
know it's this is this crazy stuff so
why use the word well I describe
yourself I think I I think it's kind of
self-indulgent to call yourself a
socialist and you know give the
Republicans unnecessary ammunition we're
I think probably we're for the same I'm
for the same kinds of policies on for
universal health care universal child
care all of these things why buy into
the Republican effort to make this sound
like something Stalin would do well he
calls himself a Democratic Socialist is
advance that's cutting it way too fine
why I use the word let me turn to a clip
from the Democratic presidential debate
in Las Vegas last week first we hear
from Bernie Sanders than Mike Bloomberg
of income and wealth inequality is make
sure that those people who are working
you know what mr. Bloomberg wasn't you
made all that money maybe your workers
played some role in that as well
[Applause]
when we have so many people go to work
everyday and they feel not good about
their jobs they feel like cogs in a
machine I want workers to be able to sit
on corporate boards as well so they can
have some say what happens proposing
absolutely not I can't think of a ways
that would make it easier for Donald
Trump to get re-elected and listening to
this conversation other countries tried
that was called communism and it just
didn't work so there was Michael
Bloomberg the former mayor of New York
City going after Bernie Sanders Richard
Wolffe you described yourself as a
socialist economists respond to what
both Paul Krugman says and what
Bloomberg is saying here sure there is
no agency neither public nor private
that defines what a socialist is if you
follow the socialist movement for the
last hundred and fifty years you would
discover that it has been a contested
terrain from day one there were
different interpretations and different
meanings Bernie Sanders is perfectly in
line with one of the traditions of what
socialism is it's the government having
a big role in offsetting some of the
awful qualities of capitalism but we
also know that the kind of control that
the government tries to operate is very
difficult for it to succeed with we once
had a new deal in this country we lost
most of it because we didn't go beyond a
government intervention to change the
society what Bernie Sanders represents
is an awareness that it's time to have a
conversation we should have had for 75
years about our capitalist system and
whether we can do better this is now a
changed environment in which what was
taboo in this country isn't anymore and
Bernie has already achieved the breaking
of a taboo in this country to talk about
socialism its strengths and weaknesses
it's different interpretations and
compare
them to capitalism rather than running
away because nasty conservatives call us
various names that's not a profound
reason and for the young people of this
country it doesn't carry much weight
anyway so I welcome the opening that
Bernie achieves that we can talk about
socialism it's different interpretations
and why we ought to explore them a lot
more than we've been able to under the
taboo of the last 75 years
oh crap man I actually agree that a lot
of young people have reacted mean we
have a a 60 year long campaign of
equating any attempt to make American
lives better with socialism and a fair
number of young people have said well in
that case I'm a socialist the trouble is
you're not going to win this election
without a fair number of old people too
and it just seems to me the again it's
self-indulgent to go down this route I
wish you wouldn't I mean if if Sanders
the nominee then Democrats are going to
have to you know get behind him and
people like me are going to end up
writing lots of things saying you know
don't be scared he uses the word
socialist but he doesn't actually mean
which what Republicans think you want
you to think he means but you know what
who needed this this this extra thing so
the I'm not sure that this is I'm not
sure I quite see what the point is I
mean it seems to me that that there's to
make the argument that says I want
social justice I want a strong
government safety net I want worker
empowerment you can say all of those
things without having to you know give
ammunition to people who want to make it
make you sound like Stalin so I mean it
I'm gonna be spending I expect I expect
Sanders will probably be the nominee and
I expect to spend a lot of of the next
year saying look he's really talking
about Denmark not in as whele but I
shouldn't have to be doing that Richard
I'm proud to be part of the socialist
tradition and I understand Paul's
difficulty he's having to defend now
Accenture ISM that's being rejected by a
large number of people the stunning
reality is that the majority of young
people at least aged 35 and under no
longer think that socialism is a bad
word
and they are immune to that and the
young people are the future of this
country which the older people know to
and they are being asked to question the
older ones by the younger ones why this
taboo why we couldn't talk about
socialism why we can't embrace a
socialism and their honor electability
my goodness if we've seen anything in
the last few years we've seen the center
whether it's in Europe or this country
falling away disappearing center left
center right for the extremes on the
right and now an extreme on the left I
don't find that frightening I understand
people who are centrist do but I welcome
that we can have an honest debate in
this country and there's much in the
socialist tradition that is well worth
keeping there are lessons of what we
should do just like there are lessons of
what we shouldn't do which is true for
capitalism as well so we're opening
things up and I think when it comes to
electability we have as much to argue
that this is the way forward as anyone
on the other side I don't think the
people who send me hate mail and I am
the king of hate mail I think that I'm a
centrist right I'm for universal health
care I'm for deficit spending on
infrastructure I'm for universal child
care
if that's centrism then you know let's
let's have it by that standard Denmark a
centrist right I want it before we go to
issues like Medicare for all I want to
turn to MSNBC and what's been happening
over the weekend a kind of meltdown on
MSNBC around the issue of Bernie Sanders
clearly looking like he's the
front-runner and chief among those
melting down appears to be MSNBC host
Chris Matthews who this weekend compared
senator Sanders Nevada victory to Nazi
Germany's takeover of France about the
fall of France in the summer of 1940 and
the general right now calls up Churchill
and says it's over insurance is a hot
be you got the greatest army in Europe
how could it be over he said it's over
so I had that print suppressed feeling I
can't be as wild as Carville but he is
damn smart and I think he's stand right
on this one so Bernie Sanders
communications director Mike Aska
responded to Matthews comment on Twitter
saying quote never thought part of my
job would be pleading with a national
news network
- stop likening the campaign of a Jewish
presidential candidate whose family was
wiped out by the Nazis to the Third
Reich but here we are a number of people
are now calling for Chris Matthews to
resign
yeah I mean far be it for me to defend
Chris Matthews who I think has been a
malign influence on a lot of our
political discourse I don't think he was
actually calling Sanders a Nazi he was
just thinking of this is what it looks
like when you've lost but it was stupid
it was stupid and was insensitive and it
was characteristic I mean if that's what
Senator ISM sounds like this notion that
calling for universal health care or if
stuff is is it some kind of extreme
position and no I mean this is this is
it's telling you something about where
Matthews is head is that and and not
something good and it's unfortunate I
don't think it's unique the fact of the
matter is there's a lot of I mean Lloyd
Blankfein saying oh you know I might
have to vote for Trump if Sanders is
nominating explain the significance of
who long life I'm going sax and you know
for God's sake yeah Trump might Sanders
might raise your taxes that is not an
important consideration American
democracy is on the line so there are a
lot of people out there who are I'm not
sure how many there are there are a lot
of influential people out there who are
horrified by the prospect of a strongly
progressive candidate and that should be
condemned you know I just wish you
wouldn't call himself a socialist
Richard Weller
well I think politics is shifting and
the centrists are having to discover
that they are centrist because the
politics has moved to the left
that's what Bernie has accomplished
that's what the young people around him
have accomplished it may be a walk word
and uncomfortable for people who used to
think of themselves as the left to
discover they're not that there's a
movement to their left but we're very
proud that that has returned
as a kind of sanity of balance in our
political discourse and so I'm not
surprised that people like Matthew's
overreact because they're being
outflanked on the Left they weren't
ready for it
I remember in 2016 talking to a high
official the Democratic Party assuring
me that Bernie Sanders would never get
more than 1 or 2 percent of any vote
anywhere ever and they didn't know and
they didn't understand and it's a little
bit like the old Bob Dylan song you know
wake up there's things going on that you
didn't foresee and that are shifting the
ground on which you stand but I want to
be clear that many of us welcome this I
mean Chris Matthews has been on a tear
he recently said I remember the Cold War
I have an attitude toward Fidel Castro
he added I believe if Castro and the
Reds had won the Cold War there would
have been executions in Central Park and
I might have been one of the ones
executed and certain other people would
be there cheering suggesting as he was
talking about Bernie Sanders that Bernie
Sanders would be responsible for his
execution in Central Park yeah for me
this is all that I hear in all of this
is a anguished fear that the politics is
moving to the left these are individuals
who made a commitment long ago in their
lives not to go to the left even if they
had sympathies there to stay in the
middle because it was the safe the wise
thing for their future for the country
and for their careers and that's no
longer the case and they are outraged
and outcome these kinds of comments as
we continue our debate on Bernie Sanders
and democratic socialism with Paul
Krugman Nobel Prize winning economist
op-ed columnist for The New York Times
has a new book out called arguing with
zombies and Richard Wolfe emeritus
professor of economics University of
Massachusetts Amherst visiting professor
at the new school his book is called
understanding socialism so Paul Krugman
I wanted to go to you're one of your
columns that you just wrote headline
Bernie Sanders isn't the left's Trump
were you right I'm more concerned about
the electability of someone who says
he's a socialist
even though he isn't and if he does win
whether he'll squander political capital
on unwinnable fights like abolishing
private health insurance your stance on
Medicare for all if I could do it if I
could wait for magic wand or if I the
time machine because somehow a bet go
back to 1947 when we almost almost got
single-payer health care I would do at
the moment if there's it's not the only
way to do it
one thing you learn if you study health
care systems is every other advanced
country has universal health care they
do it in different ways some of them
have government provisions some of them
have regulated private health care some
of them have single-payer single-payer
is not the only solution but it's it's
fine the trouble is there's 160 million
people in America who have private
health insurance you're saying to those
people we're going to replace what you
have with something completely different
trust us it'll be better it will
probably be true for most of them that
would be better but that's a huge
political lift you're asking people to
make a huge leap of faith whereas we can
in fact get to universal coverage
through a more through a public option
through a you know something like
Medicare for America something that lets
people buy into Medicare and subsidizes
it without having to waste that time and
there's so many you know that's not
having the absolute best health care
system is not the only priority if I say
what is the most biggest gap in America
is that we're not doing enough to help
children and I would like to get another
couple of percent of GDP spent on
helping children at a variety of ways
and I think that the drive for Medicare
for all will kill that possibility
interestingly when you look at the polls
in New Hampshire and in Nevada about
what people care most about in both
places
it's the same number one is health care
number two is climate change number
three I think it's inequality and number
four its foreign policy and especially
in nevada richard wolffe what's
interesting is you had a very powerful
union the culinary union where they were
offering excellent health insurance to
their workers and yet their workers
overwhelmingly the rank-and-file bucked
the leadership and said even if we're
getting great health care we have family
members who are not loved ones who are
not and ultimately
we want medicare-for-all so explain this
discrepancy Paul crabman is saying it's
not realistic well I think again the
politics in America have changed I don't
think the mass of Americans want to hear
the details about what you might get and
how careful we should be and what step
we should they want change they wanted
it from Obama who promised hope and
change they wanted even from mr. Trump
who promised the change that we didn't
get the changes that they promised
neither the one nor the other
and so people now want something that
will solve their problem will not
respect the old centrist let's go
carefully let's do this let's not push
too hard so how do you get to Medicare
for all immediately or more rapidly than
what Paul Krugman is suggesting ladies
yes Paul which is a surprise is probably
both of us but the point is there are
plenty of models out there of countries
that have in a variety of ways answered
the basic human demand I want to be
careful I want to know that when I'm
born and until I die if something
happens to me in the way of illness or
injury I am taken care of like I want a
public park and I want public schools
I want public health care and they don't
want the details and the hesitancy they
want that and any of them would be a
perfectly good basis you know it's
always interested me how people look to
other countries to say what would be
models when we have the model right here
at home we have Medicare one of the most
popular programs in this country oh yeah
we have socialized medicine for
everybody over 65 and although it's
interesting if you look at it we also do
have private insurance we have not
abolished private supplemental insurance
for older people in America so it is in
a way a bit of a compromised system the
actually existing Medicare that we have
for older Americans is not as radical as
the Medicare that Bernie Sanders
proposing for everyone but look yeah the
United States contains multitudes we
have we have pure socialized medicine
the Veterans Health Administration is a
is actual government provision of health
care and it works
we have regulated private markets and
Obamacare maybe
trash obama a lot but you know given
given the constraints he was under he
got 20 million people health insurance
who didn't have it before i personally
know people whose lives were saved by
obamacare so let's not let's not dismiss
it as nothing and and we have
single-payer but you know it says that
in a ways of telling you that there are
many ways to achieve it and we should
look at every other country does it for
everybody the problem is we have we have
a safety net that's got huge holes in it
interestingly this Yale study just came
out in the medical journal Lancet it
said Medicare for all would save the
u.s. four hundred fifty billion dollars
and prevent nearly seventy thousand
deaths a year
you have Bernie Sanders recently saying
that he wants people in the movement to
say I'm willing to fight for someone I
don't know yeah I mean I could match
Paul's argument and his little model of
somebody whose life was saved by
introducing him to people whose life was
lost or at least their relatives because
they didn't have the coverage that mr.
Obama was unable to get and for someone
who kept saying I could do more if only
I had a groundswell of support we do
have to remember that when that
groundswell developed called Occupy Wall
Street mr. Obama wiped it out with his
bulldozers in Zuccotti Park and
everywhere else undercutting the very
groundswell he had earlier used as an
excuse for not doing more but my
response is whether it's health health
care or a decent college education for
Americans that doesn't saddle them with
tens of thousands of dollars of debt the
demand is now out there and that's
what's fueling mr. Bernie Sanders
support they don't want the middling
biddle this change that they want these
problems that Paul is right have existed
in this country for many years they want
it finally solved and they want a
politician who they can believe might
actually do it as opposed to those in
the middle who have been saying it and
promising it and delay burring the
difficulties and basically not getting
it done one of your columns Paul Krugman
you talk about the headline is
zombies eatin Bloomberg's and Buddha
judges brains yes explain okay
that was mostly so my book is arguing
with zombies and one of the zombies is
this obsession with public debt and the
the belief that that that you know we
should be terribly scared of government
debt and we can't do anything because
deficits eke and that's the way bondages
talks now at the top at the very moment
when mainstream economics if you like
centrist economics it has God has
concluded hey this these debt worries
were way overblown you know the
president the American Economic
Association gave this presidential
address saying death is just not nearly
the problem people think it is and it's
not a constraint and of course
Republicans have pulled one of the
greatest acts of Policy hypocrisy in
history you know deficits were an
existential threat as long as Obama was
in office they don't matter as soon as
Trump is in office so I really don't
want to see I mean I it if we did get a
democratic centrist who bought into this
deficit scare mongering that would be a
really bad thing that would block any
kind of initiative and as we begin to
wrap up there is a mayoral there is a
presidential debate coming up on Tuesday
night in South Carolina two of the seven
candidates are billionaire Richard Wolff
your thoughts well for me it is always
an astonishment to observe this
inequality getting worse and worse I'm
one of the people even though I wasn't
alive then who celebrated that during
the 1930s we compress the inequality in
this country by means of an unusual
president whose politics are remarkably
like that of mr. Bernie Sanders these
days and we actually did something to
lessen the inequality and as soon as the
war was over we resumed we undid the New
Deal and the inequality began to get to
the crazy levels now it is an
abomination that one person for example
Jeffrey Bezos disposes of a hundred plus
billion dollars deciding what is to be
done with all those resources that's not
democratic
that's that excludes the mass of people
from the knee
that could be met if that money was used
differently and he can hardly consume it
himself
it's an extraordinary critique of
capitalism that it allows this kind of
concentrated wealth which of course
protects itself by trying to control the
politics of our country so that they
don't have the power in Congress to undo
the inequality in the first place so for
me claiming against that right on Bernie
Sanders I mean I don't think that
billionaires are inherently evil but
there is something wrong when two guys
who really don't have any kind of
national political base are in this
debate only because of their money
peculiar thing is of course that steyr
may well make Bernie Sanders the nominee
by drawing support away from Biden but
but no this is I mean seconds
Bloomberg is not evil but he shouldn't
be in this race we want to leave it
there for the moment but of course we
will continue to cover all of this
during this 2020 election year we will
be doing a five hour special on Super
Tuesday night from 7:00 p.m. Eastern
Standard Time right through midnight
I want to thank Paul Krugman Nobel Prize
winning economist op-ed columnist for
The New York Times he is the author of
numerous books his latest arguing with
zombies and thanks so much to Richard
Wolff author of the new book
understanding socialism that does it for
our broadcast I'm Amy Goodman thanks so
much
you